# Session 4

## Last time

We saw:

- OLAP vs OLTP databases
- ERD and how to generate it in pgAdmin, also generating the SQL that creates the schema
- insertion, update and deletion anomalies
- the problem with ```NULL``` values and why it's best to avoid them
- normalization
- normal forms: 1NF, 2NF, 3NF

We started working on the normalization of the trees table

Taking the column ```domain``` as example, let's first make sure that the column is a good candidate for normalization

```domain``` is a categorical column, with null values and many uniques. Inserts, updates and deletion anomalies.

The process has the following steps:

- create a new ```domains``` table (id, domain)
- import UNIQUE and NOT NULL domain values from trees to the table ```domains```. Best if values are sorted alphabetically.
- add a ```domain_id``` key in the trees table
- reconcile the foreign key with the primary key: ```trees.domain_id``` with the ```domain.id```
- add a constraint on that key so that it is a foreign key in the trees table referencing the domains table
- check that all trees records have a valid ```domain_id```
- drop the ```domain``` column in trees

## Today

### First a PC and Mac

- where is PostgreSQL installed?
- how to add PostgreSQL to the PATH
- starting, stopping and monitoring PostgreSQL with ```brew``` or ```pg_ctl```
- location of ```.psqlrc```, ```pg_hba```, ```postgresql.conf```
- create ```.pgpass``` to avoid having to type your password each time

### Practice

All practices are graded.

<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1Qgw0WUVk8UkaUVWnK3agEu-qYBgf5iU6BxIJfeeZzts/>

- connect to your local server with  ```psql``` or in ```pgAdmin```
- new dataset : Spotify songs : 366 records. csv file. no need to USE pgAdmin restore or pg_restore.
- Your task is to normalize the artist column following the process above

- If you're done before the break (11h30), read:
  - how to setup ```.psqlrc```: <https://www.crunchydata.com/postgres-tips>
  - or choose something to read in the documentation: <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql.html>

### Window functions and CTEs

We'll use the WorldHits dataset to learn about:

- window functions : ROW_NUMBER(), RANK(), ... , OVER(Partition by ...)
- Common Table Expressions : WITH ... AS (sql) SELECT ....

## EOD

- everybody is on board : PostgreSQL running, restoring SQL dump files , ```psql``` to connect
- you can normalize a column from a table
- you can write queries using window function and CTEs
