# worklab on normalization

The goal is to normalize a simple dataset.

The dataset is the WorldHits dataset

- source and information about data on kaggle: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thebumpkin/300-world-music-tracks-with-spotify-data

The data is provided by Spotify.

This dataset is a curated collection of world music, featuring 326 tracks from 66 diverse artists spanning six decades, from 1958 to 2019. It offers a rich tapestry of global sounds, from traditional rhythms to contemporary fusions. Each track is meticulously tagged with Spotify audio features, providing insights into tempo, key, energy, and more. This dataset is ideal for exploring the evolution of world music, analyzing trends across different cultures, or even training machine learning models to recognize unique musical patterns.

You can download the dataset from the github repo.

- if you have already cloned the repo, refresh it with ```git pull origin master```
- if you haven't done so already: ```git clone git@github.com:SkatAI/epitadb.git```  and ```cd epitadb```
- or simply go to https://github.com/SkatAI/epitadb/tree/master/data and click right on the WorldHits.csv file to download it

# Load the dataset

Start by creating the database and importing the data from the csv file.

psql on your **local** server either using the command line
psql (-U postgres) -d postgres
or connect on your local server with pgAdmin andd open a PSQL window.

Create a new database called ```worldhitsdb``` with the SQL query:

```sql
-- make sure the database does not exist
DROP database if exists worldhitsdb WITH(force) ;

-- then create the database. Change the OWNER if needed.
CREATE DATABASE worldhitsdb
    WITH
    OWNER = alexis
    ENCODING = 'UTF8'
    LOCALE_PROVIDER = 'libc'
    CONNECTION LIMIT = -1
    IS_TEMPLATE = False;
```

Check that the database has been created with

```sql
\l
```

Connect to worldhitsdb

```sql
\c worldhitsdb
```

Create the main table called ```tracks```

```sql
CREATE TABLE tracks (
    id serial primary key,
    Track VARCHAR(255),
    Artist VARCHAR(255),
    Album VARCHAR(255),
    Year INT,
    Duration INT,
    Time_Signature INT,
    Danceability FLOAT,
    Energy FLOAT,
    Key INT,
    Loudness FLOAT,
    Mode INT,
    Speechiness FLOAT,
    Acousticness FLOAT,
    Instrumentalness FLOAT,
    Liveness FLOAT,
    Valence FLOAT,
    Tempo FLOAT,
    Popularity INT
);
```

Finally, copy the data into the table with

Modify the query with your path to the downloaded csv file: WorldHits.csv

```sql
\COPY tracks FROM '<YOUR PATH to>/WorldHits.csv' WITH CSV HEADER DELIMITER ',';
```
\COPY tracks FROM '/Users/alexis/work/epitadb/data/WorldHits.csv' WITH CSV HEADER DELIMITER ',';

Make sure  you have correctly imported the data.

This query should return 326 rows

```sql
select count(*) from tracks;
```

# Explore the data

Now let's run a few queries to understand the data.

Notes:
- The ```Key``` column represents a numeric value ranging from 0 to 11, with 0 corresponding to the key of C. The list of keys is : ```['A', 'A#', 'B', 'C', 'C#', 'D', 'D#', 'E', 'F', 'F#', 'G', 'G#']```
- The ```Mode``` column uses 0 for minor and 1 for major
- Valence in music refers to the musical positiveness conveyed by a track

Write down the queries :

1. how many artists?
2. do all artist have the same number of tracks?
3. Who are the artists with 1 track only?
4. average track duration per artist?



# Normalization

Why is the artist column a good candidate for normalization ?

The normalization process is the following

1. create a new artists table: id as primary key and name as text (or varchar)
2. import the sorted artist names from tracks to the artists table
3. add a artist_id INT colun in trees
4. reconcile both tables by updating the trees.artist_id with the correct artists.id
5. make the trees.artists_id a foreign key
6. check that there is no gap between the 2 tables: count the number of rows where trees.artist != artists.name
7. delete the artist column in the tracks table

For each step write the query in the answer box;

# Finally, rerun the queries

- how many artists ?
- number of tracks per artists
- names of artists with 1 track only.
- average track duration per artist ?

